JAPAN WANTED HIGHER INFLATION. IT’S HERE, AND IT HURTS.

As the rest of the world fought to keep inflation in check, one
country welcomed it with open arms.

In the past few years, Japan saw a burst of inflation, spurred by
pandemic supply chain snags and geopolitical shocks, as a way to shake
the economy out of a decades-long cycle of weak growth and pressure
from deflation. So while major central banks like the U.S. Federal
Reserve raised interest rates to rein in prices, the Bank of Japan
kept rates low as inflation accelerated.

The theory was that by sticking with rock-bottom rates, the central
bank could harness the temporary spike in prices to foster the kind of
inflation it had long sought: moderate, steady and supporting economic
growth.

Businesses could cite their rising costs to justify price increases,
leading to higher revenues that went toward higher wages for workers.
With more money in their pockets, consumers could spend more, creating
a positive economic cycle.

There have been some promising signs: Big Japanese firms like Toyota
have reported large profits and pledged the biggest wage increases for
workers in decades. In March, the Bank of Japan raised its policy rate
for the first time in 17 years, concluding that the economy had
achieved the “virtuous cycle” between wages and prices it had
envisioned.

Ahead of a Bank of Japan meeting this week, there are a growing number
of signs that everything is not going to plan.

The central bank’s commitment in recent years to keeping rates low
has not only allowed inflation to run hotter. (It has been above
policymakers’ 2 percent target for more than two years.) It has also
prompted the yen to plunge, making imported food, fuel and other
staples suddenly more expensive. Consumers have responded by cutting
back sharply on spending.

Smaller businesses facing sluggish demand have found it hard to raise
prices and salaries as the country’s policymakers had hoped. And it
remains unclear whether the wage increases at big multinational
companies are spilling over to Japan’s more domestically focused
firms.

Some economists suggest that the weak consumption dragging on
Japan’s economy is a response to the Bank of Japan’s low-rate
stance, which has raised fears in consumers that inflation will
continue to surpass wage increases for years to come. Analysts are
roughly evenly split on whether Bank of Japan officials will raise
rates or keep them steady on Wednesday, when they are set to announce
their decision.

“The B.O.J. hoped that temporary inflation could lead to
long-lasting inflation by pushing up wages — giving inflation second
legs. But I don’t see that’s the case,” said Takahide Kiuchi,
executive economist at Nomura Research Institute and a former policy
board member at Japan’s central bank.

He said “surprisingly weak” consumer spending and the falling yen
“all have one root: mistakes of monetary policy made in Japan over
several years.”

If the Bank of Japan had raised rates years earlier, Mr. Kiuchi said,
“the yen would not have depreciated so much, consumer activity would
have been more stable and the economy would likely be doing better.”

Recently, on a sweltering afternoon in northwestern Tokyo, Yumiko
Umemura, a 49-year-old mother of two, stopped by a meat shop to buy a
mix of ground beef and pork. Ms. Umemura said her grocery bills had
gone up in recent years while her salary at a data-processing firm had
remained the same — a squeeze on her family’s budget she expects
to last for some time.

That has left her looking for ways to save, like buying 250 grams of
meat instead of 300. “Shopping without excess, that’s how I’ve
been cutting back,” she said.

Yoshimasa Yamamoto, the owner of the shop, said he was grappling with
the combination of slowing sales and rising costs. Even locally
sourced meat costs more, he said, because the feed for livestock is
mostly imported.

Mr. Yamamoto said he would like to raise prices but feels he can’t
because for decades his customers have known only stagnant prices.

“Customers are used to our prices, and if we raise them, they
won’t buy,” he said. “People have already stopped buying as much
anyway — how could we raise prices?”

These dynamics are starting to appear in Japan’s broader economy.
Salaries, while ticking up, have failed to keep pace with prices,
leading inflation-adjusted wages to fall for 26 consecutive months,
through May. Consumer spending, adjusted for inflation, has fallen for
four quarters in a row.

Japan’s economy has shrunk in two of the past three quarters, losing
its spot as the world’s third largest to Germany’s. This month,
Japan’s Cabinet Office cut its forecast for economic growth for the
fiscal year through March 2025, to 0.9 percent from 1.3 percent,
mostly because of a downgrade to consumer spending.

“Consumer demand is weak. The savings rate has fallen to zero.
People are having to spend their income,” said Richard Katz, an
economist and author of a recent book, “The Contest for Japan’s
Economic Future.” “To presume companies will be able to pass on
wages — the B.O.J. is seeing things through a prism that tells them
what they want to see.”

One reason Japan has struggled to manage the effects of rising prices,
some economists say, is that officials have had a hard time moving on
from longstanding policies intended to encourage inflation when there
was none. A reluctance to raise rates because it could dampen demand,
they say, has given way to an acknowledgment that consumer spending is
perhaps even more sensitive to fears of persistently high inflation.

The yen has recovered some of its value in recent weeks — partly
because expectations for falling U.S. interest rates have made
Japanese assets more attractive — but it remains far weaker than it
was before the pandemic.

Hopes that the virtuous cycle of steadily rising inflation, wages and
spending could still be in the cards are tied to the pay increases
agreed during the spring labor negotiations known as the “shunto.”

The Bank of Japan’s March rate increase came just days after
Japan’s largest federation of trade unions said negotiations between
big Japanese companies and unionized employees had resulted in the
biggest jump in pay in decades.

Shunto wage increases, which cover about 16 percent of the labor
force, began in April and phased in through June, so economists are
still monitoring their broader impact. The economic impact of last
year’s shunto increases, also sizable, ended up being “a big
disappointment,” Mr. Katz said.

“Signs point to this time being better,” he added. “But by how
much? We don’t know yet.”
